# Ternary Operators

## Table of Contents

- [Short Expressions](#short-expressions)
- [Long Expressions](#long-expressions)
- [Expressions with Multiple Conditions](#expressions-with-multiple-conditions)

## Short Expressions

The ternary operator should be used judiciously and only when it enhances the readability and clarity of the code. In some cases, it can make the code more concise and easier to understand.


```swift
continueButton.alpha = isVisible ? 1 : 0
```

## Long Expressions

However, overuse of the ternary operator can make the code harder to read and understand, especially when the conditions become complex or the expressions being evaluated are lengthy. Therefore, it's essential to use the ternary operator only when it improves the readability of the code and makes it easier to understand.

When expressions are long or complex, it's often better to replace the ternary operator with `if-else` statements nested inside self-executing closures. This approach can improve the readability and maintainability of the code by breaking down the logic into smaller, more easily understood parts. Additionally, self-executing closures can help isolate and protect variables from unintended modifications outside of their scope.

However, this approach should only be used when it truly increases clarity within the code and does not introduce unnecessary complexity.

Not Preferred:

```swift
window?.rootViewController = token != nil ? HomeViewController() : SignInViewController()
```

Preferred:

```swift
window?.rootViewController = {
    if token != nil {
        return HomeViewController()
    } else {
        return SignInViewController()
    }
}()
```

Alternately, you can split expression across multiple lines

```swift
window?.rootViewController = 
    token != nil ?
    HomeViewController() :
    SignInViewController()
```

## Expressions with Multiple Conditions

When dealing with multiple conditions, it's better to use `if-else` statements to increase the readability and avoid confusion in the code. Using nested ternary operators can quickly become convoluted and difficult to follow, making the code harder to maintain and debug.

Not Preferred:

```swift
let comparisonResult: ComparisonResult = a < b ? .orderedAscending : a > b ? .orderedDescending : .orderedSame
```

Preferred:

```swift
let comparisonResult: ComparisonResult = {
    if a < b {
        return .orderedAscending
    } else if a > b {
        return .orderedDescending
    } else {
        return .orderedSame
    }
}()
```
