# Explicit Types and Type Inference

## Table of Contents

- [Clarity](#clarity)
- [Common Arguments Against Explicit Types](#common-arguments-against-explicit-types)
- [Exceptions](#exceptions)

## Clarity

Type inference can make code harder to read for others who are not familiar with the codebase or the language used.

While reading simple code or code that we have written ourselves, we may not find the need for explicit types as everything is clear to us. However, practices that we follow to make the code more readable are ultimately meant for others. Therefore, it is essential to include explicit types to improve code clarity and readability for others.

Missing explicit types can result in a frustrating experience of having to option-click variables to get their types and creating a mental notebook to keep track of everything in the scope, especially if variable names are poorly chosen. One should not have to jump from call site to declaration to understand most APIs.

You may have had similar experience before, if not when dealing with bad code, but when using non-everyday or custom APIs.

All it takes, is a few extra seconds to make code easier for others to comprehend by including explicit types.

```swift
func fetchArtwork(withURL url: String) -> NSImage? {
    guard
        let url: URL = .init(string: url),
        let artworkMetadata: AVMetadataItem = AVPlayerItem(url: url).asset.metadata.first(where: { $0.key as? String == "APIC" }),
        let artworkData: Data = artworkMetadata.value as? Data
    else {
        return nil
    }
    
    guard
        let imageSource: CGImageSource = CGImageSourceCreateWithData(artworkData as CFData, nil),
        let bitmapImage: CGImage = CGImageSourceCreateImageAtIndex(imageSource, 0, nil)
    else {
        return nil
    }
    
    guard
        let dimension: CGFloat = [bitmapImage.width, bitmapImage.height].min().map({ CGFloat($0) })
    else {
        return nil
    }
    let x: CGFloat = (CGFloat(bitmapImage.width) - dimension) / 2
    let y: CGFloat = (CGFloat(bitmapImage.height) - dimension) / 2
    
    guard
        let croppedBitmapImage: CGImage = bitmapImage.cropping(
            to: CGRect(
                origin: CGPoint(x: x, y: y),
                size: CGSize(width: dimension, height: dimension)
            )
        )
    else {
        return nil
    }
    
    return NSImage(
        cgImage: croppedBitmapImage,
        size: CGSize(width: dimension, height: dimension)
    )
}
```

## Common Arguments Against Explicit Types

One common argument against the use of explicit types is that they are unnecessary and make code wider and harder to read.

#### Sub-Argument 1: They are Unnecessary

According to linguistic theory, we as a speaker (or in this case, writer) tend to prefer using fewer words to express our thoughts because it requires less effort. However, as a listener (or in this case, reader), we prefer having as much information as possible to decrease the need for mental note-taking and reduce effort. Even though explicit types may seem obvious and unnecessary, they are added for the benefit of the readers.

Explicit types do not inherently clutter the code. It may seem that way when compared to code that omits types, but the reality is that omitting types can actually make the code more difficult to read and understand. Sometimes, the reader is left to guess what the type might be, which can lead to confusion and mental note-taking. Explicit types remove this guesswork and provide a clear and unambiguous representation of the code. In fact, the use of explicit types can even make the code more concise, as it removes the need for verbose comments or documentation to explain what types the variables or functions should be.

```swift
struct SomeModel {
    let id = 10
    let message = "Hello, World!"
    let width: CGFloat = 100
}
```

When we agree to use explicit types in our codebase, we should maintain consistency by specifying types for even simple expressions. This helps to disambiguate and avoid confusion when reading the code.

```swift
struct SomeModel {
    let id: Int = 10
    let message: String = "Hello, World!"
    let width: CGFloat = 100
}
```

#### Sub-Argument 2: They Make Code Wider and Harder to Read

If we are concerned about increasing the code width and cluttering it, there is a simple solution. According to yet another linguistic theory, good readers do not actually read every letter in a word, nor every word in a sentence.

I suggest, that developers have taken this to a new level since we do not read code in its entirety. Code is not a poem, and we do not read it from top to bottom in a single breath. 

For example, if a function or a method returns an object that is initialized with two variables declared just above the constructor call, you will probably read this function bottom to top. You first notice that the function returns with a constructor call, then you look up to see the variables themselves. 

Similarly, when reading code from top to bottom or left to right, we can skip some parts. Code has patterns and redundancies, and our minds can fill in the gaps. Therefore, it is natural to assume that your brain will simply skip explicit types that are unnecessary for you but useful to others.

## Exceptions

Although explicit types generally make code more readable and easier to understand, there are cases where they may not be necessary.

#### Enum Cases

Although writing explicit types can improve clarity and context, there are some cases where I prefer not to write them, such as with `enum` types. If the context is clear and the `enum` values are self-explanatory, I find that the added clutter of writing out the type is unnecessary. Of course, this is a matter of personal preference, and others may choose to write out the type even for `enum`s.

```swift
enum TrafficLightState {
    case red
    case green
    case yellow
}

func updateTrafficLightColor(fromState state: TrafficLightState) {
    ...
}

updateTrafficLightColor(fromState: .red) // Instead of TrafficLightState.red
```

#### Static Members

The same rule applies to calling static members, such as `.zero` in `CGFloat`, where the type can be inferred from the context.

#### Name Shadowing

Explicit types are unnecessary when name-shadowing occurs. Name-shadowing happens when a variable is declared with the same name as another variable in an outer scope, effectively hiding the outer variable within the inner scope. In this case, the type of the inner variable can be inferred from the outer variable, making the explicit type unnecessary.

Not Preferred:

```swift
guard let managedObjectContext: NSManagedObjectContext = managedObjectContext else { return }
```

Preferred:

```swift
guard let managedObjectContext = managedObjectContext else { return }
```

Ever since the release of `Swift` `5.7`, you can utilize shorthand `if-let` syntax.

```swift
guard let managedObjectContext else { return }
```

#### Type Casts

Explicit types are typically unnecessary when performing type casting in code. This is because the resulting type is already written.

Not Preferred:

```swift
guard
    let flowDelegate: UICollectionViewDelegateFlowLayout = collectionView.delegate as? UICollectionViewDelegateFlowLayout 
else {
    return 
}
```

Preferred:

```swift
guard
    let flowDelegate = collectionView.delegate as? UICollectionViewDelegateFlowLayout 
else {
    return 
}
```
