# Trailing Closures

## Table of Contents

- [Intro](#intro)
- [Ambiguity](#ambiguity)
- [Multiple Trailing Closures](#multiple-trailing-closures)
- [Exceptions](#exceptions)

## Intro

Type inference introduces ambiguity by hiding variable or property type. Trailing closure syntax, on the other hand, can introduce ambiguity by hiding the argument name. This can make the code harder to read and understand, especially for someone who is not familiar with the codebase. In such cases, it may be better to use explicit argument names, even if it makes the code slightly longer.

## Ambiguity

In simple uses, trailing closure syntax doesn't disambiguate the context.

```swift
getUserProfile(id: id) { [weak self] profile in
    guard let self else { return }

    getPhoto(url: profile.photoUrl) { [weak self] image in
        guard let self else { return }
        
        ...
    }
}
```

The use of trailing closure syntax may not always provide enough context and clarity, particularly when dealing with non-standard or custom APIs. Although it can be useful in simple cases, assuming that all closures are `completion`s is not always accurate.

In the following example, functions themselves handle error cases by presenting a `UIAlertController` internally, and only call a `completion` for the callback chain to continue. Choosing to omit the parameter name introduces ambiguity.

```swift
func getUserProfile(
    id: Int,
    onSuccess successHandler: @escaping (UserProfileEntity) -> Void 
) {
    ...
}

func getPhoto(
    url: String,
    onSuccess successHandler: @escaping (UIImage) -> Void 
) {
    ...
}
```

API doesn't have to be custom or foreign for ambiguity to be introduced. The use of trailing closure syntax in the `UIView` animation method can also introduce ambiguity, even though it is a native API. The method has two trailing closure parameters—`animations` and `completion`—where the latter is optional. Omitting the `completion` parameter can lead to confusion and a lack of clarity, as seen in the following example where only the `animations` parameter is included.

In this case, it's unclear what happens after the animation completes or if there are any completion actions to be taken. Therefore, it's recommended to include argument name to ensure clarity and prevent any ambiguity.

```swift
UIView.animate(withDuration: 0.25) {
    ...
}
```

To avoid ambiguity and improve readability, it's important to label trailing closures with descriptive and meaningful names that accurately convey their purpose. This is especially important when using custom `SwiftUI` `View`s, where trailing closures are often used as `ViewBuilder`s to build subviews. While most `ViewBuilder`s are labeled as `content` or `label`, some `ViewBuilders` may build individual row contents or perform other specific tasks. By using descriptive names, it's easier to understand the purpose of each trailing closure and avoid confusion.

```swift
SomeCustomPicker(
    titles: titles,
    rowContent: { title in
        ...
    }
)
```

## Multiple Trailing Closures

Trailing closure syntax with multiple arguments can increase ambiguity by omitting the argument label for the first parameter but not for the second. This behavior is counterintuitive, as developers typically expect the last trailing closure to be a `completion` and the one before that to be unique. To improve clarity, it would make sense to reverse this behavior, but that's up to Apple to decide. In addition, the indentation and formatting in such cases should follow the guidelines outlined in the "Closures" chapter in "Spacing and Brackets" section.

Not Preferred:

```swift
UIView.animate(
    withDuration: 0.25,
    delay: 0,
    options: .curveLinear
) { [weak self] in
    ...
} completion: { [weak self] flag in
    ...
}
```

Preferred:

```swift
UIView.animate(
    withDuration: 0.25,
    delay: 0,
    options: .curveLinear,
    animations: { [weak self] in
        ...
    }, 
    completion: { [weak self] flag in
        ...
    }
)
```

## Exceptions

Trailing closure syntax is particularly useful for commonly-used inline closures or lambdas, such as those used in `Swift`'s own high-order functions.

```swift
cities.sort { $0 < $1 }
```

```swift
cities.map { $0.capitalized }
```

```swift
cities.filter { $0.first == "A" }
``` 
