# Spacing and Brackets

## Table of Contents

- [Intro](#intro)
- [Tabs](#tabs)
- [Line Spacing](#line-spacing)
- [Container Types](#container-types)
- [Opening Brackets](#opening-brackets)
- [Closing Brackets](#closing-brackets)
- [If Statements](#if-statements)
- [Guard Statements](#guard-statements)
- [Functions](#functions)
- [Closures](#closures)
- [Multi-Line String Literals](#multi-line-string-literals)

## Intro

Developers tend to have personal styles when it comes to the use of spacing and brackets. However, this style tends to be inconsistent and has no fundamental rules. This document strives to standardize spacing and bracket use using simple rules, in order to help with code readability and familiarity.

## Tabs

Tabs are 4 spaces. Nothing else to discuss. 4 spaces make it easier to visualize large and nested blocks of codes. Plus, it's a standard. No need to reinvent a wheel here.

## Line Spacing

#### Files

Extra newlines shouldn't be added at the end of the file.

#### Types and Protocols

Types and protocols should be spaced out with one line.

#### Methods

Methods should be spaced out with one line. No newline should be added after the opening bracket.

Whitespace within functions should separate blocks of functionality for visual clarity. But they should not be excessive.

#### Variables and Properties

Properties are more contextual. For instance, assuming that no comments or API documentation is written, properties can be grouped within a function or a declaration by their usecase. 

```swift
struct SomeStruct {
    let propertyA: Int
    let propertyB: Int
    let propertyC: Int
    
    let propertyD: String
    let propertyE: String
    let propertyF: String
}
```

## Container Types

Container types, such as variable, property, and dictionary element types, should be spaced out with a single space.

Not Preferred:

```swift
let number:Int = 10
```

Preferred:

```swift
let number: Int = 10
```

## Opening Brackets

Opening bracket should begin on the same line as the declaration (K&R style).

Not Preferred:

```swift
func doSomething()
{
    ...
}
```

Preferred:

```swift
func doSomething() {
    ...
}
```

There are some exceptions to this rule. For additional info, refer to "Functions with Generic Type Constraints" section.

## Closing Brackets

Closing brackets, parentheses, and square brackets should close on a separate line, and be horizontally aligned with the declaration (K&R style).

Not Preferred:

```swift
let user: User = .init(
    firstName: "First",
    lastName: "Last")
```

```swift
let numbers: [Int] = [
    1,
    2,
    3]
```

Preferred:

```swift
let user: User = .init(
    firstName: "First",
    lastName: "Last"
)
```

```swift
let numbers: [Int] = [
    1,
    2,
    3
]
```

## If Statements

#### Short Expression

In a short block of conditional code, opening bracket of `else if` or `else` clauses should begin on the same line as the closing bracket of the previous clause (1TBS style).

Not Preferred:

```swift
if someCondition {
    doSomething()
} 
else {
    doAnotherThing()
}
```

Preferred:

```swift
if someCondition {
    doSomething()
} else {
    doAnotherThing()
}
```

#### Long Expression

When the expressions inside the brackets become large, it might become hard to understand where one clause ends, and another begins.

One option is to add a spacing before next clause begins:

```swift
if someCondition {
    doSomething1()
    doSomething2()
    doSomething3()
    doSomething4()
    doSomething5()
    
} else {
    doAnotherThing1()
    doAnotherThing2()
    doAnotherThing3()
    doAnotherThing4()
    doAnotherThing5()
}
```

Writing a `switch` statement over a simple `Bool` value is excessive. There are only two possible values—`false` and `true`. However, it is an option when writing long expressions:

```swift
switch someCondition {
case false:
    doAnotherThing1()
    doAnotherThing2()
    doAnotherThing3()
    doAnotherThing4()
    doAnotherThing5()
    
case true:
    doSomething1()
    doSomething2()
    doSomething3()
    doSomething4()
    doSomething5()
}
```

When writing `switch` statement, it's important to write `false` statement before `true`, much like in a truth table.

#### Expressions with Multiple Conditions

If expressions are short enough, 2 or more conditions can be written on a single line.

```swift
if someConditionA, someConditionB {
    doSomething()
} else {
    doAnotherThing()
}
```

But in most cases, it's better to move them to separate newlines. When listing conditions, tabs should be used. This will maintain a consistency across codebase, and everything will be indented by 4 spaces, instead of 2, 3, or more, just because of reserved keywords. Additionally, conditions are written in a horizontally-aligned list, which makes them easier to read.

Not Preferred:

```swift
if someConditionA, 
    someConditionB {
    doSomething()
} else if someConditionC, 
    someConditionD {
    doAnotherThing()
} else {
    doYetAnotherThing()
}
```

Preferred:

```swift
if 
    someConditionA, 
    someConditionB 
{
    doSomething()
} else if
    someConditionC, 
    someConditionD
{
    doAnotherThing()
} else {
    doYetAnotherThing()
}
```

## Guard Statements

#### Short Expression

Short `guard` expressions can be written on a single line.

```swift
guard someCondition else { return }
```

#### Long Expression

When expressions become large enough, condition can be moved to a newline.

```swift
guard
    evaluateSomeCondition(withArgument: someArgument)
else {
    return
}
```

Note, that `return` statement has tabbed indentation for consistency.

#### Expressions with Multiple Conditions

If `guard` expressions are short enough, 2 or more condition can be written on a single line.

```swift
guard conditionA, conditionB else { return }
```

But in most cases, it's better to move them to separate newlines. When listing conditions, tabs should be used. This will maintain a consistency across codebase, and everything will be indented by 4 spaces, instead of 2, 3, or more, just because of reserved keywords. Additionally, conditions are written in a horizontally-aligned list, which makes them easier to read.

Not Preferred:

```swift
guard conditionA,
    conditionB,
    conditionC else {
    return
}
```

Preferred:

```swift
guard
    conditionA,
    conditionB,
    conditionC
else {
    return
}
```

## Functions

#### Short Declaration

In short functions, parameter can be declared on the same line:

```swift
func doSomething(with number: Int) -> Bool {
    ...
}
```

#### Large Declaration

If function or parameter name becomes large enough, argument can be moved to a newline:

```swift
func doSomeOtherThingWithThisFunction(
    withGivenNumber number: Int
) -> Bool
``` 

#### Functions with Multiple Arguments

If function declaration is short enough, 2 or more arguments can be written on a single line.

```swift
func add(_ num1: Int, to num2: Int) -> Int {
    ...
}
```

But in most cases, it's better to move them to separate newlines. When listing arguments, tabs should be used. This will maintain a consistency across codebase, and everything will be indented by 4 spaces, instead of any specified number, just because of function name. Additionally, arguments are written in a horizontally-aligned list, which makes them easier to read.

Not Preferred:

```swift
func doSomething(argument1: Int,
                 argument2: Double,
                 argument3: Char,
                 argument4: String) -> Bool {
    ...
}
```

Preferred:

```swift
func doSomething(
    argument1: Int,
    argument2: Double,
    argument3: Char,
    argument4: String
) -> Bool {
    ...
}
```

#### Functions with Async/Throwing

If function declaration is large enough, argument can be moved to a newline, and `async`/`throws` signature on yet another newline alongside with the `return` statement.

```swift
func doSomething<Value>(
    with value: Value
) async throws -> Bool {
    ...
}
```

#### Functions with Generic Type Constraints

If function contains a generic type with a constraint, it's better to place them on a separate newline (Allman style).

This approach implies that no generic constraint is declared inside the diamond notation.

```swift
func doSomething<Value>(
    with value: Value
) 
    where Value: Hashable
{
    ...
}
```

```swift
func doSomething<Value>(
    with value: Value
) -> Bool 
    where Value: Hashable
{
    ...
}
```

```swift
func doSomething<Value>(
    with value: Value
) -> Bool 
    where 
        Value: BinaryFloatingPoint,
        Value.Stride: BinaryFloatingPoint
{
    ...
}
```

Same rule applies to generics type constraints inside types:

```swift
final class HomePresenter<View, Router, Interactor>:
    HomePresentable,
    SideMenuDelegate,
    ItemPickerDelegate,
    WalkthroughDelegate,
    ImagePickerDelegate
    where
        View: HomeViewable,
        Router: HomeRoutable,
        Interactor: HomeInteractive
{
    ...
}
```

## Closures

This style guide advices against trailing closure syntax. For additional info, refer to " Context and Clarity" chapter. With that in mind, we can define closure spacing and bracket use.

#### Short Expressions

If expressions are short enough, opening bracket of a closure can begin on same line as function and end on newline, while being horizontally aligned with function name.

```swift
doSomething(completion: { [weak self] in
    ...
})
```

#### Long Expressions

When expressions get larger, it's better to move arguments on separate newlines. In this case, closing bracket for closure will be horizontally aligned with the closure argument name. And closing parentheses will be horizontally aligned with function name.

```swift
UIView.animate(
    withDuration: 0.25,
    animations: { [weak self] in
        ...
    }
)
```

In this list-style alignment, closures with short bodies can be written on a single line.

```swift
UIView.animate(
    withDuration: 0.25,
    animations: { [weak self] in ... }
)
```

These approaches ensure that even with multiple arguments, some of which are closures, entire expression remains readable and has consistent tabbed indentation.

```swift
UIView.animate(
    withDuration: 0.25,
    delay: 0,
    options: .curveLinear,
    animations: { [weak self] in
        ...
    },
    completion: { [weak self] flag in
        ...
    }
)
```

## Multi-Line String Literals

Multi-line string literals should be declared with formatting that's consistent with the use of brackets and indentation.

Not Preferred:

```swift
let string: String = """
    Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetur adipiscing elit.
    Aenean tempus justo in nibh venenatis semper.
    Fusce posuere magna eu magna scelerisque eleifend.
    """
```

Preferred:

```swift
let string: String = """
    Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetur adipiscing elit.
    Aenean tempus justo in nibh venenatis semper.
    Fusce posuere magna eu magna scelerisque eleifend.
"""
```
