# Pragma Marks

## Table of Contents

- [Intro](#intro)
- [Standardization](#standardization)
- [Order of Sections](#order-of-sections)

## Intro

The use of pragma marks can greatly enhance code organization and readability. By inserting them into the code, developers can easily categorize different sections of their code and quickly navigate to specific areas when working on a particular feature or functionality. This can save time and reduce the risk of errors caused by searching through large blocks of code. Additionally, pragma marks can make the code more readable and understandable to other developers who may be working on the same codebase. By using clear and concise section headings, the code can become easier to comprehend, maintain, and build upon, which ultimately leads to more efficient and higher quality software development.

```swift
// MARK: - Home View Controller
final class HomeViewController: UIViewController {
    // MARK: Subviews
    ...

    // MARK: Properties
    ...

    // MARK: Lifecycle
    override func viewDidLoad() {
        super.viewDidLoad()
        setUp()
    }

    // MARK: Setup
    private func setUp() {
        setUpView()
        addSubviews()
        setUpLayout()
        setUpNavigationBar()
    }
    
    private func setUpView() {
        view.backgroundColor = .systemBackground
    }

    private func addSubviews() {
        ...
    }

    private func setUpLayout() {
        NSLayoutConstraint.activate([
            ...
        ])
    }
    
    private func setUpNavigationBar() {
        navigationItem.title = "Home"
    }

    // MARK: ...
}
```

By compartmentalizing types and files into distinct blocks of functionality, clear guidelines are established for future modifications. For instance, if there is a need to implement the `viewWillAppear(_:)` method, there is already a predefined location in which it can be added. This approach not only promotes consistency throughout the codebase but also makes it easier for developers to identify and understand the purpose of each section. As a result, modifying and building upon the code becomes a much smoother process. By adhering to these guidelines, developers can save time, reduce the risk of errors, and create more reliable software.


## Standardization

#### Simple Declarations

For optimal code organization and readability, pragma marks that delineate top-level types should be written as // MARK: - Some Section, while nested pragma marks should be written as // MARK: Some Internal Section. The use of a dash before the section name creates a visual separator line in the code, which can be especially helpful when viewing the code in the mini-map or jump bar.

However, for simple types and `protocol`s, internal compartmentalization may not be necessary. They, however, can be used sparingly to emphasize critical sections of the code. By striking a balance between too much and too little use of pragma marks, developers can create well-organized code that is both easy to read and easy to maintain

```swift
// MARK: - User
struct User {
    let firstName: String
    let lastName: String
}
```

```swift
// MARK: - Traffic Light State
enum TrafficLightState {
    case red
    case green
    case yellow
}
```

#### Complex Declarations

When implementing new functionality, particularly beyond properties or `case`s, it is often necessary to introduce additional sections into the code. This can help to maintain a clear and concise structure that is easy to read and modify. For example, when adding a new method or function to a `class`, it may be appropriate to create a new section within the `class` for that method or function. This can help to keep related code together and make it easier to locate and modify later on. Similarly, when adding new features or functionality to a larger project, creating new sections or even separate files can help to keep the codebase organized and manageable. By following established conventions for code organization and structure, developers can create more efficient and maintainable software over time.

```swift
// MARK: - User
struct User {
    // MARK: Properties
    let firstName: String
    let lastName: String
    
    // MARK: Initializers
    init(fromJSON json: [String: Any?]) {
        ...
    }
}
```

```swift
// MARK: - Traffic Light State
enum TrafficLightState {
    // MARK: Cases
    case red
    case green
    case yellow
    
    // MARK: Properties
    var nextState: Self {
        ...
    }
}
```

## Order of Sections

- In types and `protocol`s, properties should be declared first, followed by initializers, and then by any additional functionality
- Setup section, which runs once during initialization or at some initial lifecycle point, should come before the configuration section. This ensures that all necessary components are set up before they are configured or modified.
- In `enum`s, the `case`s section should come first, since it defines the possible values of the enum. This can be followed by any additional functionality.
- In `UIViewController`s and `UIView`s, subviews section should be declared before properties. Followed by lifecycle section, and any additional functionality.
- In `View`s, the body section should come after properties and initializers, followed by any additional functionality
