# Reasons for Not Using Extensions for Protocol Conformances

## Table of Contents

- [Intro](#intro)
- [Reason 1: They Are Not Always Feasible](#reason-1-they-are-not-always-feasible)
- [Reason 2: They Make Declaration's Role Harder to Understand](#reason-2-they-make-declarations-role-harder-to-understand)
- [Reason 3: They Permit Splitting Types Across Files](#reason-3-they-permit-splitting-types-across-files)
- [Reason 4: They May Decrease Performance](#reason-4-they-may-decrease-performance)

## Intro

Following up the previous point, `protocol` conformance should be implemented in the main declaration. There are some reasons for this rule.

## Reason 1: They Are Not Always Feasible

When implementing a property from a protocol as a stored property, we have to defer back to the type's main declaration. This can result in splitting of the members and ultimately reducing code readability, which is the initial problem we aimed to solve.

One possible solution to this problem is to implement the protocol inside the main declaration and compartmentalize its members with an internal pragma mark. This allows us to keep related code together and maintain a more organized and readable codebase. By using pragma marks to define clear sections for each type or protocol, we can make it easier to navigate and modify the code as needed.

Consider the following `protocol`.

```swift
// MARK: - Game Character Protocol
protocol GameCharacterProtocol {
    var id: String { get }
    var health: Int { get set }
}
```

Not Preferred:

```swift
// MARK: - NPC
struct NPC {
    // MARK: Properties
    ...

    // MARK: Game Character Protocol Leftovers...?
    var health: Int = 100
}

// MARK: - Game Character Protocol
extension SomeStruct: GameCharacterProtocol {
    var id: String { ... }
}
```

Preferred:

```swift
// MARK: - NPC
struct NPC: GameCharacterProtocol {
    // MARK: Properties
    ...

    // MARK: Game Character Protocol
    var id: String { ... }
    var health: Int = 100
}
```

## Reason 2: They Make Declaration's Role Harder to Understand

Splitting a type's functionality into multiple extensions that conform to various `protocol`s can make it more difficult to understand everything that the type does, especially if there are numerous such extensions. This approach may also require more mental effort to keep track of which types conform to which `protocol`s.

In contrast, listing all `protocol`s in type declaration makes it easier to understand the role of a type.

```swift
final class HomePresenter<View, Router, Interactor>:
    HomePresentable,
    WalkthroughDelegate,
    SideMenuDelegate,
    ItemPickerDelegate,
    ImagePickerDelegate
    where
        View: HomeViewable,
        Router: HomeRoutable,
        Interactor: HomeInteractive
{
    ...
}
```

## Reason 3: They Permit Splitting Types Across Files

When we split types into extensions, we may be tempted to move some of those extensions into separate files. For example, we may declare a `HomeViewController` in one file and conform to `UITableView` `protocol`s in separate files. While this approach can help to keep each file smaller and more focused, it can also lead to decreased readability and increased mental overhead. Constantly jumping between files and trying to keep track of which extensions are located where can be time-consuming and frustrating.

## Reason 4: They May Decrease Performance

Static dispatch is faster than dynamic dispatch, and as a result, it should be used whenever possible to improve the performance of our code.

In `Swift`, members declared within a non-`final` `class` are dispatched dynamically at runtime, while members declared in an extension are dispatched statically at compile time. This means that if we need to optimize our code for performance, moving methods or properties from a non-`final` `class` to an extension can sometimes be a viable option.

```swift
class Parent {
    func doSomething() { ... } // Dynamic dispatch (table)
}

extension Parent {
    func doAnotherThing() { ... } // Static dispatch
}
```

However, there are pitfalls to this approach. If we override a method from a subclass that's declared within an extension, we need to use the `@objc` annotation, which means that these methods will execute via dynamic dispatch. This can actually decrease performance, since message-based dynamic dispatch is slower than table-based dispatch.

```swift
class Parent {
    func doSomething() { ... } // Dynamic dispatch (table)
}

extension Parent {
    @objc
    func doAnotherThing() { ... } // Dynamic dispatch (message)
}

class Child: Parent {
    override func doSomething() { ... }
    
    override func doAnotherThing() { ... }
}
```

However, if you do not intend for the extension methods to be overridden, mark them as `final`. But, marking them as `final` eliminates the need for an extension. These methods can simply be moved to the main declaration.

```swift
class Parent {
    func doSomething() { ... } // Dynamic dispatch (table)
    
    final func doAnotherThing() { ... } // Static dispatch
}
```

Additionally, it's worth noting that the performance gains from using static dispatch may not always be significant enough to justify the extra effort and potential drawbacks. It's important to measure the actual performance of our code before and after making changes, to ensure that we're actually seeing a meaningful improvement.
