# Reasons for Using Extensions

## Table of Contents

- [Reason 1: To Use Compile Flags](#reason-1-to-use-compile-flags)
- [Reason 2: To Provide Type Constraints](#reason-2-to-provide-type-constraints)
- [Reason 3: To Extend Types and Protocols from Other Modules](#reason-3-to-extend-types-and-protocols-from-other-modules)
- [Reason 4: To Extend Types and Protocols from Other Files](#reason-4-to-extend-types-and-protocols-from-other-files)

## Reason 1: To Use Compile Flags

Extensions should be used only when the functionality cannot be logically implemented inside the main declaration of a type. In other words, if the functionality belongs to the main concept of the type, it should be declared inside the main declaration. Only functionality that can be logically separated from the main concept of the type, and can be categorized as a separate concern, should be implemented in an extension.

Consider the following type.

```swift
struct GenericStateModel_EnabledPressedDisabled<Value> {
    let enabled: Value
    let pressed: Value
    let disabled: Value
}
```

In order to implement a functionality for `UIKit`-based devices, we need to write an import statement. This can only be done inside an extension.

```swift
#if canImport(UIKit)

import UIKit

extension GenericStateModel_EnabledPressedDisabled {
    public static var clearUIColors: GenericStateModel_EnabledPressedDisabled<UIColor> {
        .init(
            enabled: .clear,
            pressed: .clear,
            disabled: .clear
        )
    }
}

#endif
```

## Reason 2: To Provide Type Constraints

Extensions are useful when a functionality cannot be implemented inside the main declaration. For example, when providing type constraints to a generic type, an extension is required.

```swift
extension GenericStateModel_EnabledPressedDisabled: Equatable where Value: Equatable {}

extension GenericStateModel_EnabledPressedDisabled: Hashable where Value: Hashable {}

extension GenericStateModel_EnabledPressedDisabled: Comparable where Value: Comparable {
    public static func < (lhs: Self, rhs: Self) -> Bool {
        ...
    }
}
```

## Reason 3: To Extend Types and Protocols from Other Modules

Adding functionality to types from another modules can only be done via extensions.

```swift
extension Array {
    subscript(safe index: Int) -> Element? {
        guard index >= 0, index < count else { return nil }
        return self[index]
    }
}

```

## Reason 4: To Extend Types and Protocols from Other Files

Even though it was mentioned earlier that types should not be broken across files, sometimes it's convenient to do so. For instance, when the functionality inside the extension doesn't have to be exposed beyond the `fileprivate` or `private` scope.

One common use case for breaking types across files is to write an extension with a `fileprivate` member of one type, which is then called from the extension of another type. This allows for the encapsulation of implementation details while still providing the necessary functionality. Essentially, you can isolate the imported functionality and keep it separate from the main declaration.
