# Closures

## Table of Contents

- [Intro](#intro)
- [Short Expressions](#short-expressions)
- [Long Expressions](#long-expressions)

## Intro

This style guide advises against using trailing closure syntax, as it can sometimes lead to decreased code clarity. For additional info, refer to "Trailing Closures" documentation. Regardless of whether a closure is trailing or not, proper spacing and bracket use should still be followed.

## Short Expressions

If the function or method expressions are short enough, the opening bracket of the closure can begin on the same line as the function call and end on a new line, while being horizontally aligned with the function name.

```swift
doSomething(completion: { [weak self] in
    ...
})
```

## Long Expressions

When the function or method expressions become longer, it's better to move the arguments to separate newlines. In this case, opening parenthesis should be horizontally aligned with the closure argument name. And the the closing should be vertically aligned with the closure argument name.

```swift
UIView.animate(
    withDuration: 0.25,
    animations: { [weak self] in
        ...
    }
)
```

```swift
UIView.animate(
    withDuration: 0.25,
    delay: 0,
    options: .curveLinear,
    animations: { [weak self] in
        ...
    },
    completion: { [weak self] flag in
        ...
    }
)
```

In this list-style alignment, closures with short bodies can be written on a single line.

```swift
UIView.animate(
    withDuration: 0.25,
    animations: { [weak self] in ... }
)
```

These approaches help ensure that even when there are multiple arguments, some of which are closures, the entire expression remains readable and has a consistent, tabbed indentation. This can help make code easier to understand and maintain, especially as the codebase grows in complexity.
