# If Statements

## Table of Contents

- [Short Expressions](#short-expressions)
- [Long Expressions](#long-expressions)
- [Expressions with Multiple Conditions](#expressions-with-multiple-conditions)

## Short Expressions

In a short block of conditional code, the opening bracket of else if or else clauses should be placed on the same line as the closing bracket of the previous clause (1TBS style). This can help to reduce unnecessary vertical whitespace and make the code more compact and easier to read. 

Not Preferred:

```swift
if someCondition {
    doSomething()
} 
else {
    doAnotherThing()
}
```

Preferred:

```swift
if someCondition {
    doSomething()
} else {
    doAnotherThing()
}
```

## Long Expressions

When the expressions inside the brackets become too large, it may be difficult to distinguish where one clause ends and another begins, making the code harder to read and understand.

It may be more practical to add a spacing before next clause begins.

```swift
if someCondition {
    doSomething1()
    doSomething2()
    doSomething3()
    doSomething4()
    doSomething5()
    
} else {
    doAnotherThing1()
    doAnotherThing2()
    doAnotherThing3()
    doAnotherThing4()
    doAnotherThing5()
}
```

Writing a `switch` statement over a simple `Bool` value is generally unnecessary. Since there are only two possible values—`false` and `true`. A simple `if` statement can suffice. However, it can be useful when writing more complex expressions.

```swift
switch someCondition {
case false:
    doAnotherThing1()
    doAnotherThing2()
    doAnotherThing3()
    doAnotherThing4()
    doAnotherThing5()
    
case true:
    doSomething1()
    doSomething2()
    doSomething3()
    doSomething4()
    doSomething5()
}
```

The order of `case` statements in a switch statement is important. When dealing with a boolean value, it's important to write the `false` `case` before the `true` `case`, following the convention used in truth tables.

## Expressions with Multiple Conditions

If expressions are short enough, 2 or more conditions can be written on a single line for the sake of brevity and readability.

```swift
if someConditionA, someConditionB {
    doSomething()
} else {
    doAnotherThing()
}
```

When conditions in an expression are too long to fit on a single line, it's generally better to list them separately, each on its own indented line. This maintains consistency throughout the codebase and ensures that all lines are indented by the same amount, that is, four spaces. It also makes it easier to read the conditions when they're written in a horizontally-aligned list. To achieve this, it's recommended to use tabs for indentation, rather than spaces, to avoid inconsistencies due to the different widths of reserved keywords.

Not Preferred:

```swift
if someConditionA, 
    someConditionB {
    doSomething()
} else if someConditionC, 
    someConditionD {
    doAnotherThing()
} else {
    doYetAnotherThing()
}
```

Preferred:

```swift
if 
    someConditionA, 
    someConditionB 
{
    doSomething()
} else if
    someConditionC, 
    someConditionD
{
    doAnotherThing()
} else {
    doYetAnotherThing()
}
```
